# Azure MySQL Developer Guide

Welcome to **THE** comprehensive guide to developing MySQL based
applications on Microsoft Azure! The sections in this guide will help
you navigate through the typical journey a MySQL developer building
cloud-based applications will encounter. The guide will start with
basics such as how to get started with tools and common helpful
resources. With a base development environment setup and configured, you
will then continue the journey by understanding Azure landing zones and
how they can be configured in multiple ways to support MySQL
applications. Finally, the ultimate goal is for you to successfully
deploy a stable, performant MySQL application running securely in
Microsoft Azure with cloud best practices such as security and
high-availability first and foremost. Let's get started. \# Introduction
to MySQL

Choosing a relational database is an important consideration for any
application. MySQL database is one of the most popular open source
database choices, suitable for heavily-utilized enterprise applications.

## Common Use Cases for MySQL

MySQL supports a rich set of SQL query capabilities and offers excellent
performance through storage engines optimized for transactional and
non-transactional workloads, in-memory processing, and robust server
configuration through modules. Consult the [MySQL
Documentation](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/features.html)
for a more in-depth review of MySQL's features.

One of the most common uses cases for MySQL databases is web
applications. Due to MySQL's scalability, popular content management
systems, such as [WordPress](https://wordpress.org/) and
[Drupal](https://www.drupal.org/) utilize it for persistence. More
broadly, LAMP apps, which integrate Linux, Apache, MySQL, and PHP,
leverage scalable web servers, languages, and database engines to serve
a large fraction of global web services.

### Comparison with Other RDBMS Offerings

Though MySQL has a distinct set of advantages, it competes with a vast
number of other relational database offerings. Though the emphasis of
this guide is operating MySQL on Azure to architect scalable
applications, it is important to be aware of other offerings, notably
MariaDB.

While MariaDB is compatible with the MySQL protocol, the project is not
managed by Oracle, and its maintainers claim that this allows them to
better compete with proprietary databases. However, MySQL has over
twenty years of development experience, and businesses appreciate the
platform's maturity.

Another popular open source MySQL competitor is PostgreSQL. MySQL
supports many of the advanced features of PostgreSQL, such as JSON
storage, replication and failover, and partitioning, in an easy to use
manner.

## Deployment Models

MySQL has a plethora of deployment options for development and
production environments alike.

### On-premises

MySQL is a cross-platform offering, and corporations can utilize their
on-premises hardware to deploy highly-available MySQL configurations.
On-premises deployments of MySQL require significant capital
expenditure.

### Docker

MySQL offers a [Docker image](https://hub.docker.com/_/mysql) to operate
MySQL in containerized applications. Containerized MySQL can persist
data to the machine with the Docker runtime, and it can even operate
from an existing MySQL data directory.

### Other Clouds

MySQL databases can be deployed on other public cloud platforms by
utilizing VMs, such as Amazon EC2; this is known as an *IaaS*
deployment. However, these platforms offer their own managed MySQL
products, such as [Amazon RDS for
MySQL](https://aws.amazon.com/rds/mysql/) and [Google Cloud SQL for
MySQL](https://cloud.google.com/sql/docs/mysql#docs). \# Introduction to
hosting MySQL on Azure

Now that you understand the benefits of a MySQL deployment and a few
common models to operate MySQL, this section explains approaches to host
MySQL on Azure and the advantages of the Azure platform.

## Azure Platform

Microsoft announced Azure, formally known as Windows Azure, in 2008. At
its inception, the only database offering that Windows Azure had was
*SQL Azure*, based on Microsoft SQL Server. Ever since Windows Azure
became generally available in 2010, Microsoft has made its cloud
platform far more flexible, including support for open source databases
such as MySQL and VM (IaaS) offerings.

### Advantages

The Azure platform is trusted by millions of customers and over 90,000
Cloud Solution Providers partnered with Microsoft. Azure allows firms to
easily modernize their applications, expedite application development,
and tailor their applications for their industries. In fact, according
to internal Microsoft research, 85% of Fortune 100 companies have
employed Azure AI solutions to innovate and greatly reduce their time to
market for new features. Moreover, a [July 2020 Forrester
study](https://azure.microsoft.com/resources/the-revenue-and-growth-opportunities-for-microsoft-azure-partners/)
found that the studied group of Microsoft partners increased their gross
margin by 12% due to customer demand for Azure solutions.

By offering solutions on Azure, ISVs can access the largest B2B market.
In addition, through the [Azure Partner Builder's
Program](https://partner.microsoft.com/marketing/azure-isv-technology-partners),
Azure assists ISVs with offering their solutions for customers to
evaluate, purchase, and deploy.

Azure's development tools, such as Visual Studio and low-code Power
Apps, are part of the platform's meteoric success. Companies that adopt
capable, modern tools are 65% more innovative, according to a [2020
McKinsey & Company
report.](https://azure.microsoft.com/mediahandler/files/resourcefiles/developer-velocity-how-software-excellence-fuels-business-performance/Developer-Velocity-How-software-excellence-fuels-business-performance-v4.pdf)

![This image demonstrates common development tools on the Microsoft
cloud platform to expedite application
development.](media/ISV-Tech-Builders-tools.png "Microsoft cloud tooling")

### Free Subscription Offering

To facilitate developers' adoption of Azure, Microsoft offers a [free
subscription](https://azure.microsoft.com/free/search/) with \$200
credit, applicable for thirty days; yearlong access to free quotas for
popular services, including Azure Database for MySQL; and access to
always free Azure service tiers.

## MySQL on Azure Hosting Options

The concepts IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service) and PaaS (Platform as a
Service) describe the responsibilities of the public cloud provider and
the enterprise customer to manage their data. Both approaches are common
to host MySQL on Azure.

### IaaS

In the IaaS model, developers deploy MySQL on Azure Virtual Machines.
This provides the customer with the flexibility to choose when to patch
the VM OS and MySQL engine, and the option to install other software on
the database server, such as antivirus utilities. Microsoft is
responsible for the underlying VM hardware that constitutes the Azure
infrastructure.

Because IaaS MySQL hosting gives greater control over the MySQL database
engine and the OS, many organizations choose it to migrate on-premises
solutions while minimizing capital expenditure.

### PaaS (DBaaS)

In the PaaS model, developers deploy a managed MySQL environment on
Azure. Unlike IaaS, they cede control over patching the MySQL engine and
OS to the Azure platform, and Azure automates many administrative tasks,
like providing high availability, backups, and protecting data.

Like IaaS, customers are still responsible for managing query
performance, database access, and database objects, such as indexes. It
is suitable for applications where the MySQL configuration exposed by
Azure is sufficient and access to the OS is unnecessary.

The Azure DBaaS MySQL offering is [Azure Database for
MySQL](https://azure.microsoft.com/services/mysql/#features), which is
based on MySQL community edition and supports common administration
tools and programming languages. As addressed in further depth,
Microsoft provides multiple deployment modes to alleviate the weaknesses
of PaaS databases.

# Introduction to Azure

Now that you understand why millions of users choose Azure, and the
basic database deployment models on the cloud (IaaS vs.Â PaaS), this
document will provide more theory about how developers interact with
Azure.

The image below from the [Azure Fundamentals Microsoft Learn
Module](https://docs.microsoft.com/learn/modules/intro-to-azure-fundamentals/)
demonstrates how IaaS and PaaS can classify Azure services. Moreover,
Azure empowers flexible *hybrid cloud* deployments and supports a
variety of common tools, such as Visual Studio and the Azure CLI, to
manage Azure environments.

![This image shows the classification of Azure services into IaaS and
PaaS
categories.](./media/azure-services.png "Categories of Azure services")

Here is a summary of the Azure services used in the whitepaper scenario
besides the managed MySQL offerings described previously.

-   **Virtual Machines (IaaS)**: You will begin by running a PHP sample
    application on an Azure Windows Server Virtual Machine.
-   **Azure App Service (PaaS)**: You will deploy the PHP application to
    Azure App Service, a flexible, simple-to-use application hosting
    service.
-   **Azure Container Instances (PaaS)**: You will *containerize* your
    app on the VM to operate in an environment isolated from other
    development tools installed on the system. Azure Container Instances
    provides a managed environment to operate containers.
-   **Azure Kubernetes Service (PaaS)**: AKS also hosts containerized
    apps, but it is optimized for more advanced orchestration scenarios,
    such as high availability.

This list is not exhaustive; for a more comprehensive view, consult the
[Azure Fundamentals Microsoft
Learn](https://docs.microsoft.com/learn/modules/intro-to-azure-fundamentals/tour-of-azure-services)
module.

## The Azure Management Hierarchy

Azure provides a flexible resource hierarchy to simplify cost management
and security. This hierarchy consists of four levels:

-   **Management groups**: Management groups consolidate multiple Azure
    subscriptions for compliance and security purposes.
-   **Subscriptions**: Subscriptions govern cost control and access
    management. Azure users cannot provision Azure resources without a
    subscription.
-   **Resource groups**: Resource groups consolidate the individual
    Azure resources for a given deployment. All provisioned Azure
    resources belong to one resource group. In this whitepaper, you will
    provision a *resource group* in your *subscription* to hold the
    required resources.
    -   Resource groups have a geographic location that determines where
        metadata about that resource group is stored
-   **Resources**: An Azure resource is an instance of a service. An
    Azure resource belongs to one resource group located in one
    subscription.
    -   Most Azure resources are provisioned in a particular region

![This image shows Azure resource
scopes.](./media/scope-levels.png "Azure resource scopes")

The *Azure Resource Manager* governs interaction with Azure resources.
All Azure management tools, including the CLI, PowerShell module, REST
API, and browser-based Portal, interact with the Azure Resource Manager.
Observe that security is built into Azure Resource Manager.

![This image demonstrates how the Azure Resource Manager provides a
robust, secure interface to Azure
resources.](media/consistent-management-layer.png "Azure Resource Manager explained")

After users and services authenticate with Azure, *role-based access
control* (RBAC), built on the Azure Resource Manager, dictates whether
they are authorized to access a resource, modify the resource, or give
other users and services access to that resource. RBAC consists of three
parts:

-   A *role definition* describes a set of actions that can be
    performed. It can be broad or granular.
-   A *security principal* represents a user, a group of users, or a
    service.
-   The *scope* dictates at what level a role assignment to a security
    principal applies.

An example is assigning the *Contributor* role over a resource group to
a developer in your organization. In this case, the *Contributor* role
allows the developer to manage all resources contained within the
resource group but not manage other users' access to those resources.
The scope is the resource group, and the security principal is the
developer's account in Azure Active Directory.

![This image demonstrates the three components of Azure
RBAC.](media/rbac-overview.png "Azure RBAC overview")

### Azure Management Tools

The flexibility and variety of Azure's management tools make it
intuitive for all users, irrespective of their skill level with certain
technologies.

The **Azure portal** gives developers a quick view of the state of their
Azure resources. It supports extensive user configuration and simplifies
custom reporting. The **Azure mobile app** provides similar features for
mobile users.

**Azure PowerShell** and the **Azure CLI** (for Bash shell users) are
useful for automating tasks that cannot be performed in the Azure
portal. Note that both of these tools follow an *imperative* approach,
meaning that users must explicitly script the creation of resources in
the correct order. These tools do not support creating resources in
parallel.

Lastly, **ARM templates** are optimal for deploying resources in a
*declarative* manner. Azure Resource Manager can potentially create the
resources in an ARM template in parallel. ARM templates are useful to
create multiple identical environments, such as development, staging,
and production environments.

### Other Tips

To develop an effective hierarchy, administrators must consult with
cloud architects and financial and security personnel. Here are a few
other best practices to follow for Azure deployments.

-   **Adopt a naming convention:** Names in Azure should include
    business details, such as the organization department, and
    operational details for IT personnel, like the workload.
-   **Adopt other Azure governance tools:** Azure provides mechanisms
    such as [resource
    tags](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/azure-resource-manager/management/tag-resources?tabs=json)
    and [resource
    locks](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/azure-resource-manager/management/lock-resources?tabs=json)
    to facilitate compliance, cost management, and security.

## Resources to guide an Azure Deployment

### Support

Azure provides [multiple support plans for
businesses](https://azure.microsoft.com/support/plans/), depending on
their business continuity requirements. There is also a large user
community:

-   [StackOverflow Azure
    Tag](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/azure)
-   [@Azure on Twitter](https://twitter.com/azure)

### Training

-   [Azure Certifications &
    Exams](https://docs.microsoft.com/learn/certifications/browse/?products=azure)
-   [Microsoft Learn](https://docs.microsoft.com/learn/)
    -   [Azure Fundamentals (AZ-900) Learning
        Path](https://docs.microsoft.com/learn/paths/az-900-describe-cloud-concepts/)

# Introduction to Azure Database for MySQL

As mentioned previously, developers can deploy MySQL on Azure through
Virtual Machines (IaaS) or Azure Database for MySQL (PaaS). Though PaaS
offerings do not support direct management of the OS and the database
engine, they have built-in support for high availability, automating
backups, and meeting compliance requirements. Moreover, Azure Database
for MySQL supports MySQL Community Editions 5.6, 5.7, and 8.0, making it
flexible for most migrations. For most use cases, Azure PaaS MySQL
allows developers to focus on application development and deployment,
instead of OS and RDBMS management, patching, and security.

As the image below demonstrates, Azure Resource Manager handles resource
configuration, meaning that standard Azure management tools, such as the
CLI, PowerShell, and ARM templates, are still applicable. This is termed
the *control plane*.

For managing database objects and access controls on those objects,
standard MySQL management tools, such as [MySQL
Workbench](https://www.mysql.com/products/workbench/), still apply. This
is known as the *data plane*.

![This image demonstrates the control plane for Azure PaaS
MySQL.](./media/mysql-conceptual-diagram.png "Control plane for Azure PaaS MySQL")

## Azure Database for MySQL Deployment Modes

Azure provides both *Single Server* and *Flexible Deployment* modes.
Below is a summary of these offerings. For a more comprehensive
comparison table, please consult [this
document.](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/select-right-deployment-type)

### Single Server

Single Server is suitable when apps do not need extensive database
customization. Single Server will manage patching, offer high
availability, and manage backups on a predetermined schedule (though
developers can set the backup retention times between a week and 35
days). To reduce compute costs, developers can [pause the Single Server
offering.](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/how-to-stop-start-server)
It offers an [SLA of
99.99%](https://azure.microsoft.com/updates/azure-database-for-mysql-general-availability/).

> For a refresher on how the SLAs of individual Azure services affect
> the SLA of the total deployment, review the associated [Microsoft
> Learn
> Module.](https://docs.microsoft.com/learn/modules/choose-azure-services-sla-lifecycle/)

### Flexible Server

Flexible Server is also managed by the Azure platform, but it exposes
more control to the user. Cost management is one of the major advantages
of Flexible Server: it supports a *burstable* tier, which is based on
the B1MS Azure VM tier and is optimized for workloads that do not
continually use the CPU. Just like Single Server, [Flexible Server can
also be
paused.](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/flexible-server/how-to-restart-stop-start-server-cli)
The image below shows how Flexible Server works for a non-high
availability arrangement.

> *Locally-redundant storage* replicates data within a single
> *availability zone*. *Availability zones* are present within a single
> Azure region (such as East US) and are geographically isolated. All
> Azure regions that support availability zones have at least three.

![This image demonstrates how MySQL Flexible Server works, with compute,
storage, and backup
storage.](./media/flexible-server.png "Operation of MySQL Flexible Server")

#### High Availability

The image above does not feature high availability. Flexible Server
implements HA by provisioning another VM to serve as a standby.

It is possible to provision this secondary Flexible Server VM in another
availability zone, as shown below. As mentioned previously, this HA
option is only supported for Azure regions with availability zones.
While this option does provide redundancy against zonal failure, there
is more latency between the zones that affects replication.

![This image demonstrates Zone-Redundant HA for MySQL Flexible
Server.](media/1-flexible-server-overview-zone-redundant-ha.png "Zone-Redundant HA")

To compensate for the latency challenges, Azure provides HA within a
single zone. In this configuration, both the primary node and the
standby node are in the same zone. All Azure regions support this mode.
Of course, it does not insulate against zonal failure.

![This image demonstrates HA for MySQL Flexible Server in a single
zone.](./media/flexible-server-overview-same-zone-ha.png "HA in a single zone")

To learn more about HA with MySQL Flexible Server, consult the
[documentation.](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/flexible-server/concepts-high-availability)

#### Flexible Server Pricing & TCO

All three MySQL Flexible Server tiers offer a storage range between 20
GiB and 16 TiB and the same backup retention period range of 1-35 days.
However, they differ in core count and memory per vCore. Choosing a
compute tier affects the database IOPS and pricing.

-   Burstable: This tier corresponds to a B-series Azure VM. Instances
    provisioned in this tier have 1-2 vCores. It is ideal for
    applications that do not utilize the CPU consistently.
-   General Purpose: This tier corresponds to a Ddsv4-series Azure VM.
    Instances provisioned in this tier have 2-64 vCores and 4 GiB memory
    per vCore. It is ideal for most enterprise applications requiring a
    strong balance between memory and vCore count.
-   Memory Optimized: This tier corresponds to an Edsv4-series Azure VM.
    Instances provisioned in this tier have 2-64 vCores and 8 GiB memory
    per vCore. It is ideal for high-performance or real-time workloads
    that depend on in-memory processing.

To estimate the TCO for Azure Database for MySQL, use the [Azure Pricing
Calculator](https://azure.microsoft.com/pricing/calculator/). Note that
you can also use the [Azure TCO
Calculator](https://azure.microsoft.com/pricing/tco/calculator/) to
estimate the cost savings of deploying PaaS Azure MySQL over the same
deployment in an on-premises data center. Simply indicate your
on-premises hardware and the Azure landing zone, adjust calculation
parameters, like the cost of electricity, and observe the potential
savings.

#### Flexible Server Unsupported Features

Azure provides a [detailed list of the limitations of Flexible
Server](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/flexible-server/concepts-limitations).
Here are a few notable ones.

-   Support for only the InnoDB and MEMORY storage engines; MyISAM is
    unsupported
-   The DBA role and the `SUPER` privilege are unsupported
-   `SELECT ... INTO OUTFILE` statements to write query results to files
    are unsupported, as the filesystem is not directly exposed by the
    service

# Setup and Tools

## Azure Free Account

As described in the [Why Move to Azure
document](../02_IntroToMySQL/02_01_Why_Move_To_Azure.md) document, Azure
offers a \$200 free credit for developers to trial Azure. Enroll today
to explore MySQL offerings on Azure.

## Azure Subscriptions and Limits - TODO

## Azure Authentication - TODO

## Creating Landing Zones

The term *landing zone* refers to an Azure environment that supports
application migration and modernization by facilitating scalability,
security, governance, and more. Resources can be deployed to an Azure
environment through the following tools.

## Azure CLI Tools

The Azure CLI is geared towards Bash shell users and is useful for
automating tasks that cannot easily be performed in the Azure portal.
Note that the CLI follows an *imperative* approach, meaning that users
must explicitly script the creation of resources in the correct order,
handle errors, and more.

It is possible to run the Azure CLI from the [Azure Cloud
Shell](shell.azure.com) or to [download the CLI tools locally from
Microsoft.](https://docs.microsoft.com/cli/azure/install-azure-cli)

## Azure PowerShell

Like the Azure CLI, Azure PowerShell is a useful automation tool that
falls into the imperative infrastructure management category. It is
geared towards Windows administrators, though PowerShell is
cross-platform.

Again, developers can run Azure PowerShell directly from the [Azure
Cloud Shell](shell.azure.com) or install the `Az` module from the
PowerShell Gallery, as described in the [installation
document.](https://docs.microsoft.com/powershell/azure/install-az-ps?view=azps-6.6.0)

## Visual Studio Code

Visual Studio Code is an open-source, cross-platform text editor. It
offers useful utilities for various languages through extensions.
Download Visual Studio Code from the [Microsoft download
page.](https://code.visualstudio.com/download)

There is a
[MySQL](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=formulahendry.vscode-mysql)
extension that allows developers to organize their database connections,
administer databases, and query databases. Consider adding it to your
Visual Studio Code workflow for MySQL.

# Environment Setup

## Azure

## Windows

## Linux

## MacOS

## SDKs

# Provision Flexible Server and Database

This document illustrates how to deploy MySQL Flexible Server using
various Azure management tools.

## Azure Portal

Azure provides a [quickstart
document](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/flexible-server/quickstart-create-server-portal)
for users who would like to use the Azure portal to provision Flexible
Server. While this is a great opportunity to explore the configuration
parameters of Flexible Server, IaC approaches, like the imperative Azure
CLI or the declarative ARM template, are preferable to create
deployments that can easily be replicated in other environments.

## Azure CLI

The Azure CLI `az mysql flexible-server` set of commands is very robust.
[Azure's quickstart
guide](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/flexible-server/quickstart-create-server-cli)
demonstrates how the `az mysql flexible-server create` and
`az mysql flexible-server db create` commands can automatically populate
server parameters. Note that it is possible to exercise greater control
over these commands by reviewing the documentation for the
[`flexible-server create`](https://docs.microsoft.com/cli/azure/mysql/flexible-server?view=azure-cli-latest#az_mysql_flexible_server_create)
and
[`flexible-server db create`](https://docs.microsoft.com/cli/azure/mysql/flexible-server/db?view=azure-cli-latest#az_mysql_flexible_server_db_create)
commands.

> Running the CLI commands from [Azure Cloud Shell](shell.azure.com) is
> preferable, as the context is already authenticated with Azure.

The image below, from a successful CLI provisioning attempt for Flexible
Server, maps CLI flags to various Flexible Server parameters.

![This image demonstrates the MySQL Flexible Server provisioned through
Bash CLI commands.](./media/mysql-flex-params.png "CLI provisioning")

## ARM Template

Azure provides a [quickstart
document](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/flexible-server/quickstart-create-arm-template#review-the-template)
with a comprehensive ARM template for a Flexible Server deployment. We
have also provided a [sample ARM
template](mysql-flexible-server-template.json) that just requires the
`serverName`, `administratorLogin`, and `administratorLoginPassword`
parameters to deploy: the Azure sample template requires additional
parameters to run. It can be deployed with the
`New-AzResourceGroupDeployment` PowerShell command in the quickstart or
the `az deployment group create` CLI command.

# Query Azure Database for MySQL Using the Azure CLI

This guide explains how to perform queries against Azure Database for
MySQL Flexible Server using the Azure CLI and the
`az mysql flexible-server` utilities.

## Setup

While the Azure sample demonstrates how to provision a Flexible Server
instance using the CLI, you can follow one of the provisioning methods
in the [Provision MySQL Flexible
Server](./03_05_Provision_MySQL_Flexible_Server.md) document.

## Instructions

This guide is based on a [Microsoft
document.](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/flexible-server/connect-azure-cli#create-a-database)

The Azure CLI supports running queries interactively, via the
`az mysql flexible-server connect` command, which is similar to running
queries interactively against a MySQL instance through the MySQL CLI. It
is also possible to run an individual SQL query or a SQL file using the
`az mysql flexible-server execute` command.

Note that these commands require the `rdbms-connect` CLI extension,
which is automatically installed if it is not present. If you encounter
permissions errors from the Azure Cloud Shell, execute the commands from
a local installation of the Azure CLI.

In addition to the queries in the document, you can run basic admin
queries. The statements below create a new user `analyst` that can read
data from all tables in `newdatabase`.

``` sql
USE newdatabase;
CREATE USER 'analyst'@'%' IDENTIFIED BY '[SECURE PASSWORD]';
GRANT SELECT ON newdatabase.* TO 'analyst'@'%';
FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
```

The new `analyst` user can also connect to `newdatabase` in the Flexible
Server instance. The new user can only query tables in `newdatabase`.

![This image demonstrates running queries against the Flexible Server
instance using the Azure
CLI.](./media/analyst-query.png "Running an admin query from the Azure CLI")

> For more details on creating databases and users in Single Server and
> Flexible Server, consult [this
> document.](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/howto-create-users?tabs=flexible-server)
> Note that it uses the `mysql` CLI.

# Java (Spring Boot) Language Support

This guide will demonstrate how to operate a Spring Framework
application that queries Azure Database for MySQL through the Spring
Data JPA. We will also present Azure extensions for popular Java
development tools.

## Setup

### Prerequisites

Please complete the instructions for [working with Flexible Server in
MySQL Workbench.](03_06_Query_MySQL_Workbench.md) Utilize version 8.0.26
as you complete the guide to ensure compatibility with Single Server.

Moreover, download Postman, a popular REST client. If you are more
comfortable with another utility, such as `curl`, feel free to use it
instead.

### IntelliJ Setup

Download the [IntelliJ IDEA](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/download)
IDE. Community edition will suffice. It comes with a custom JDK, so it
is not necessary to install the JDK separately.

After installing IntelliJ, install the [Azure Toolkit for
IntelliJ](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/8053-azure-toolkit-for-intellij/)
plugin. Then, authenticate with Azure, as described in
[this](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/developer/java/toolkit-for-intellij/sign-in-instructions)
document.

Once everything is equipped, you will see an **Azure Explorer** tab on
the left side of the screen. Note that it is possible to manage Azure
Database for MySQL Single Server instances from the Azure Explorer.

![This image demonstrates the Azure Toolkit for IntelliJ plugin, with
the Azure Database for MySQL node
expanded.](./media/azure-explorer-intellij.png "Azure Toolkit for IntelliJ plugin installation success")

### App Setup

Clone the
[gs-accessing-data-mysql](https://github.com/spring-guides/gs-accessing-data-mysql)
repository to your local machine. This is an example app from the Spring
documentation.

Open the `complete` directory in the repository root in IntelliJ. If you
are prompted to choose between using the Maven configuration or the
Gradle configuration, choose the Maven one.

![This image shows the complete project opened in IntelliJ in the
Project
tab.](./media/intellij-complete-spring-boot-project.png "Complete project")

### Database Setup

The IntelliJ Azure explorer supports Azure Database for MySQL Single
Server, but not Flexible Server. Luckily, you can provision a Single
Server instance directly within the Azure Explorer.

1.  Navigate to the **Azure Explorer** tab, right-click on **Azure
    Database for MySQL**, and select **+ Create**.

2.  The **Create Azure Database for MySQL** dialog box will open. Select
    **+ More settings** (1) and populate the following parameters:

    -   **Project details**
        -   **Subscription** (2)
        -   **Resource group** (3): choose an existing resource group
            from the dropdown or create a new one by pressing **+**
    -   **Server details**
        -   **Server name** (4): provide a unique value, like
            `springboot-single-server-SUFFIX`
        -   **Location** (5): choose an Azure location near you
        -   **Version** (6): choose `8.0`
    -   **Administrator account**
        -   **Admin username** (7): enter `sqlroot`
        -   **Password/confirm password** (8): choose a secure password
    -   **Connection security**
        -   Select **Allow access from current local PC** (9)

    ![This image demonstrates how to create a new MySQL Single Server
    instance from IntelliJ and populate it with the parameters
    above.](./media/intellij-create-single-server.png "Creating a new MySQL Single Server instance")

3.  Select **OK**. Allow the task to continue in the background.

4.  Once provisioning completes (it should only take a few minutes),
    observe the new MySQL Single Server instance appear in the Azure
    explorer. Right-click the instance and select **Show properties**. A
    panel will open with basic information about the instance, including
    Spring connection information for the `application.properties` file.

    ![This image demonstrates Single Server MySQL connection information
    from the IntelliJ Azure
    explorer.](./media/mysql-instance-information.png "MySQL connection information")

5.  Create a new connection to your Azure Database for MySQL Single
    Server instance from MySQL Workbench. Use the following SQL
    statement to create a new database called `newdatabase`. This
    application will not function with the provided `mysql` system
    database.

    ``` sql
    CREATE DATABASE newdatabase;
    ```

## Run the App

1.  Open `application.properties` from the project hierarchy: `src` >
    `main` > `resources`. Delete all the `spring.datasource.*` entries.

    ![This image demonstrates how to edit the application.properties
    file.](./media/edit-application-properties.png "Editing application.properties")

2.  Navigate to the **Azure Explorer**, right-click the Single Server
    instance you provisioned, and select **Connect to Project
    (Preview)**.

3.  In the **Azure Resource Connector** window, keep all parameters the
    same. Simply populate the **Password**. Then, select **OK**.

    ![This image demonstrates the Azure Resource Connector dialog
    box.](./media/azure-resource-connector-intellij.png "Azure Resource Connector")

4.  Replace the contents you removed from the `application.properties`
    file with the following. Notice how the connection information is
    encapsulated in environment variables.

        spring.datasource.url=${AZURE_MYSQL_URL}
        spring.datasource.username=${AZURE_MYSQL_USERNAME}
        spring.datasource.password=${AZURE_MYSQL_PASSWORD}

5.  Start the application from the upper right-hand corner of the
    screen.

    ![This image shows how to start the Spring Boot app from
    IntelliJ.](./media/start-app-intellij.png "Starting Spring Boot app")

## Testing the App

1.  Open Postman, or the REST client of your choice. Make a `POST`
    request to `http://localhost:8080/demo/add` with the URL parameters
    `name` and `email`.

    ![This image shows how to make a POST request to the Java app
    endpoint.](./media/post-request-postman.png "POST to endpoint")

2.  Make a `GET` request to `http://localhost:8080/demo/all`. The
    entries that you added through the POST request will be displayed.

    ![This image shows how to make a GET request to the Java app
    endpoint.](./media/get-request-postman.png "GET request from Postman")

3.  As expected, the data is persisted to the MySQL Single Server
    instance.

    ![This image shows the user data persisted to the MySQL Single
    Server instance with a query in MySQL
    Workbench.](./media/result-set-mysql-workbench.png "Data persisted to Single Server")

## Stop the App

1.  Stop the app in IntelliJ.

2.  In the **Azure Explorer**, right-click the MySQL Single Server
    instance you created and select **Stop**.

Congratulations. You have successfully installed IntelliJ, the Azure
Explorer extension, created a MySQL Single Server instance, and securely
operated an app using the Single Server.

# PHP Language Support

This document demonstrates how to manipulate data in an Azure Database
for MySQL Flexible Server instance and query it using PHP and the
*MySQLi* library, which is provided with PHP.

## Setup

Follow one of the methods in the [Provision MySQL Flexible
Server](03_05_Provision_MySQL_Flexible_Server.md) document to create a
Flexible Server instance with a database.

Moreover, install PHP on your system from the [downloads
page.](https://windows.php.net/download/) These instructions were tested
with Non Thread Safe PHP 8.0.13.

> Your `php.ini` file needs to uncomment the `extension=mysqli` and
> `extension=openssl` lines for these steps to work.

A text editor such as Visual Studio Code may also be useful.

Lastly, download the [connection
certificate](https://dl.cacerts.digicert.com/DigiCertGlobalRootCA.crt.pem)
that is used for SSL connections with the MySQL Flexible Server
instance. In these snippets, the certificate was saved to `C:\Tools` on
Windows. Adjust this if necessary.

## Instructions

Microsoft's [quickstart
guide](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/flexible-server/connect-php)
performs standard CRUD operations against the MySQL instance from a
console app. This document modifies the code segments from the guide to
provide an encrypted connection to the Flexible Server instance.

The first code snippet creates a table called `Products` with four
columns, including a primary key. Adjust the `host`, `username` (most
likely `sqlroot`), `password`, and `db_name` (most likely `newdatabase`)
parameters to the values you used during provisioning. Moreover, adjust
the certificate path in the `mysqli_ssl_set()` method.

``` php
<?php
$host = '[SERVER NAME].mysql.database.azure.com';
$username = 'sqlroot';
$password = '[PASSWORD]';
$db_name = 'newdatabase';

//Establishes the connection
$conn = mysqli_init();
mysqli_ssl_set($conn, NULL, NULL, "C:\Tools\DigiCertGlobalRootCA.crt.pem", NULL, NULL);
mysqli_real_connect($conn, $host, $username, $password, $db_name, 3306, MYSQLI_CLIENT_SSL);
if (mysqli_connect_errno()) {
die('Failed to connect to MySQL: '.mysqli_connect_error());
}

// Run the create table query
if (mysqli_query($conn, '
CREATE TABLE Products (
`Id` INT NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT ,
`ProductName` VARCHAR(200) NOT NULL ,
`Color` VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL ,
`Price` DOUBLE NOT NULL ,
PRIMARY KEY (`Id`)
);
')) {
printf("Table created\n");
}

//Close the connection
mysqli_close($conn);
?>
```

You should see a console output with the message `Table created`.

The second code snippet uses the same logic to start an SSL-secured
connection and to close the connection. This time, it leverages a
prepared insert statement with bound parameters.

``` php
<?php
$host = '[SERVER NAME].mysql.database.azure.com';
$username = 'sqlroot';
$password = '[PASSWORD]';
$db_name = 'newdatabase';

//Establishes the connection
$conn = mysqli_init();
mysqli_ssl_set($conn, NULL, NULL, "C:\Tools\DigiCertGlobalRootCA.crt.pem", NULL, NULL);
mysqli_real_connect($conn, $host, $username, $password, $db_name, 3306, MYSQLI_CLIENT_SSL);
if (mysqli_connect_errno()) {
die('Failed to connect to MySQL: '.mysqli_connect_error());
}

//Create an Insert prepared statement and run it
$product_name = 'BrandNewProduct';
$product_color = 'Blue';
$product_price = 15.5;
if ($stmt = mysqli_prepare($conn, "INSERT INTO Products (ProductName, Color, Price) VALUES (?, ?, ?)")) {
mysqli_stmt_bind_param($stmt, 'ssd', $product_name, $product_color, $product_price);
mysqli_stmt_execute($stmt);
printf("Insert: Affected %d rows\n", mysqli_stmt_affected_rows($stmt));
mysqli_stmt_close($stmt);
}

//Close the connection
mysqli_close($conn);
?>
```

You should see the console output message `Insert: Affected 1 rows`.

The third code snippet utilizes the `mysqli_query()` method, just like
the first code snippet. However, it also utilizes the
`mysqli_fetch_assoc()` method to parse the result set.

``` php
<?php
$host = '[SERVER NAME].mysql.database.azure.com';
$username = 'sqlroot';
$password = '[PASSWORD]';
$db_name = 'newdatabase';

//Establishes the connection
$conn = mysqli_init();
mysqli_ssl_set($conn, NULL, NULL, "C:\Tools\DigiCertGlobalRootCA.crt.pem", NULL, NULL);
mysqli_real_connect($conn, $host, $username, $password, $db_name, 3306, MYSQLI_CLIENT_SSL);
if (mysqli_connect_errno()) {
die('Failed to connect to MySQL: '.mysqli_connect_error());
}

//Run the Select query
printf("Reading data from table: \n");
$res = mysqli_query($conn, 'SELECT * FROM Products');
while ($row = mysqli_fetch_assoc($res)) {
var_dump($row);
}

//Close the connection
mysqli_close($conn);
?>
```

PHP returns an array with the column values for the row inserted in the
previous snippet.

The next snippet uses a prepared update statement with bound parameters.
It modifies the `Price` column of the record.

``` php
<?php
$host = '[SERVER NAME].mysql.database.azure.com';
$username = 'sqlroot';
$password = '[PASSWORD]';
$db_name = 'newdatabase';

//Establishes the connection
$conn = mysqli_init();
mysqli_ssl_set($conn, NULL, NULL, "C:\Tools\DigiCertGlobalRootCA.crt.pem", NULL, NULL);
mysqli_real_connect($conn, $host, $username, $password, $db_name, 3306, MYSQLI_CLIENT_SSL);
if (mysqli_connect_errno()) {
die('Failed to connect to MySQL: '.mysqli_connect_error());
}

//Run the Update statement
$product_name = 'BrandNewProduct';
$new_product_price = 15.1;
if ($stmt = mysqli_prepare($conn, "UPDATE Products SET Price = ? WHERE ProductName = ?")) {
mysqli_stmt_bind_param($stmt, 'ds', $new_product_price, $product_name);
mysqli_stmt_execute($stmt);
printf("Update: Affected %d rows\n", mysqli_stmt_affected_rows($stmt));

//Close the connection
mysqli_stmt_close($stmt);
}

//Close the connection
mysqli_close($conn);
?>
```

After executing these commands, you should receive the message
`Update: Affected 1 rows`.

The final code snippet deletes a row from the table using the
`ProductName` column value. It again uses a prepared statement with
bound parameters.

``` php
<?php
$host = '[SERVER NAME].mysql.database.azure.com';
$username = 'sqlroot';
$password = '[PASSWORD]';
$db_name = 'newdatabase';

//Establishes the connection
$conn = mysqli_init();
mysqli_ssl_set($conn, NULL, NULL, "C:\Tools\DigiCertGlobalRootCA.crt.pem", NULL, NULL);
mysqli_real_connect($conn, $host, $username, $password, $db_name, 3306, MYSQLI_CLIENT_SSL);
if (mysqli_connect_errno()) {
die('Failed to connect to MySQL: '.mysqli_connect_error());
}

//Run the Delete statement
$product_name = 'BrandNewProduct';
if ($stmt = mysqli_prepare($conn, "DELETE FROM Products WHERE ProductName = ?")) {
mysqli_stmt_bind_param($stmt, 's', $product_name);
mysqli_stmt_execute($stmt);
printf("Delete: Affected %d rows\n", mysqli_stmt_affected_rows($stmt));
mysqli_stmt_close($stmt);
}

//Close the connection
mysqli_close($conn);
?>
```

Congratulations. You successfully created an SSL-secured connection with
Flexible Server, created a table (DDL), and performed CRUD operations
against that table (DML).

# Python Language Support

This guide will demonstrate how to query Azure Database for MySQL
Flexible Server using the `mysql-connector-python` library on Python 3.

## Setup

Follow one of the methods in the [Provision MySQL Flexible
Server](03_05_Provision_MySQL_Flexible_Server.md) document to create a
Flexible Server instance with a database.

Moreover, install Python 3.7 or above from the [Downloads
page](https://www.python.org/downloads/). This sample was tested using
Python 3.8.

A text editor like Visual Studio Code will greatly help.

Though a Python Virtual Environment is not necessary for the sample to
run, using one will avoid conflicts with packages installed globally on
your system. The commands below will create a Virtual Environment called
`venv` and activate it on Windows. Instructions will differ for other
OS.

``` cmd
python -m venv venv
.\venv\Scripts\activate
```

## Instructions

This document is based on [Microsoft's
sample](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/flexible-server/connect-python).

The first code snippet creates a table, `inventory`, with three columns.
It uses raw queries to create the `inventory` table and insert three
rows. If the snippet succeeds, you should see an output like the one
below.

    Connection established
    Finished dropping table (if existed).
    Finished creating table.
    Inserted 1 row(s) of data.
    Inserted 1 row(s) of data.
    Inserted 1 row(s) of data.
    Done.

Note that the sample establishes an SSL connection with the MySQL
instance. You can use the statement below (placed before `cursor` and
`conn` are closed) to validate the use of SSL.

``` python
cursor.execute("SHOW STATUS LIKE 'Ssl_cipher'")
print(cursor.fetchone())
```

If you want to bind the [SSL public
certificate](https://dl.cacerts.digicert.com/DigiCertGlobalRootCA.crt.pem)
with your connections to Flexible Server, which is recommended by Azure,
download the public certificate to a location on your machine (such as
`C:\Tools`). Then, edit the `config` dictionary to add the `ssl_ca` key
and the file path of your certificate as the value.

``` python
config = {
  'host':'[SERVER].mysql.database.azure.com',
  'user':'sqlroot',
  'password':'[PASSWORD]',
  'database':'newdatabase',
  'ssl_ca': 'C:\Tools\DigiCertGlobalRootCA.crt.pem'
}
```

The second code snippet connects to the MySQL instance and executes a
raw query to SELECT all rows from the `inventory` table. This time, it
uses the `fetchall()` method to parse the result set into a Python
iterable. You should see an output like the one below.

    Connection established
    Read 3 row(s) of data.
    Data row = (1, banana, 150)
    Data row = (2, orange, 154)
    Data row = (3, apple, 100)
    Done.

The third code snippet executes an UPDATE statement to change the
`quantity` value of the record identified by `name`. You should see an
output like the one below.

    Connection established
    Updated 1 row(s) of data.
    Done.

The final snippet executes a raw DELETE statement against the
`inventory` table targeting records identified by `name`. You should see
an output like the one below.

    Connection established
    Deleted 1 row(s) of data.
    Done.

At this point, you have successfully opened a connection to Flexible
Server, created a table (DDL), and performed CRUD operations (DML)
against data in the table.

If you created a Python Virtual Environment for this document, simply
enter `deactive` into the console.

# Java Language Support

This document describes tools to interact with Azure Database for MySQL
(Single Server and Flexible Server) through Java.

## Example Code

Refer to the [Connect and Query sample for
Java](./03_Connect_Query_Java_IntelliJ.md), which uses IntelliJ, Spring
Boot, and Spring Data JPA.

## Application Connectors

*MySQL Connector/J* is a JDBC-compatible API which natively implements
the MySQL protocol in Java, rather than utilizing client libraries. The
Connect and Query sample does not directly utilize *MySQL Connector/J*,
but Microsoft provides a sample that uses this technology.

To allow developers to focus on implementing business logic,
applications commonly use persistence frameworks like Spring Data JPA.
Spring Data JPA extends the JPA specification, which governs
*object-relational mapping* (ORM) technologies in Java. It functions on
top of JPA implementations, like the Hibernate ORM. The Connect and
Query sample leverages Spring Data JPA and *MySQL Connector/J* to access
the Azure MySQL instance and expose data through a web API.

Flexible Server is compatible with all Java client utilities for MySQL
Community Edition. However, Microsoft has only validated *MySQL
Connector/J* for use with Single Server due to its network connectivity
setup. Refer to
[this](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/concepts-compatibility)
document for more information about drivers compatible with Single
Server.

### Resources

1.  [MySQL Connector/J
    Introduction](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/connector-j/8.0/en/connector-j-overview.html)
2.  MySQL Connector/J Microsoft Samples
    -   [Single
        Server](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/connect-java)
    -   [Flexible
        Server](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/flexible-server/connect-java)
3.  [Introduction to Spring Data
    JPA](https://www.baeldung.com/the-persistence-layer-with-spring-data-jpa)
4.  [Hibernate ORM](https://hibernate.org/orm/)

## Tooling

The Connect and Query sample leverages IntelliJ, which is one of the
most widely used Java IDEs. This section provides resources for other
common tools.

### Eclipse

Eclipse is another popular IDE for Java development. It supports
extensions for enterprise Java development, including powerful utilities
for Spring applications. Moreover, through the Azure Toolkit for
Eclipse, developers can quickly deploy their applications to Azure
directly from Eclipse.

**Tool-Specific Resources**

1.  [Installing the Azure Toolkit for
    Eclipse](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/developer/java/toolkit-for-eclipse/installation)
2.  [Create a Hello World web app for Azure App Service using
    Eclipse](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/developer/java/toolkit-for-eclipse/create-hello-world-web-app)

### Maven

Maven improves the productivity of Java developers by managing builds,
dependencies, releases, documentation, and more. Maven projects are
created from archetypes. Microsoft provides the Maven Plugins for Azure
to help Java developers work with Azure Functions, Azure App Service,
and Azure Spring Cloud from their Maven workflows.

> **Note**: Application patterns with Azure Functions, Azure App
> Service, and Azure Spring Cloud are addressed in the [End-to-End
> development story.](../04_EndToEndDev/04_End_To_End_Development.md)

**Tool-Specific Resources**

1.  [Maven
    Introduction](https://maven.apache.org/guides/getting-started/index.html)
2.  [Develop Java web app on Azure using Maven (App
    Service)](https://docs.microsoft.com/learn/modules/publish-web-app-with-maven-plugin-for-azure-app-service/)
3.  [Deploy Spring microservices to Azure (Spring
    Cloud)](https://docs.microsoft.com/learn/modules/azure-spring-cloud-workshop/)
4.  [Develop Java serverless Functions on Azure using
    Maven](https://docs.microsoft.com/learn/modules/develop-azure-functions-app-with-maven-plugin/)

# Security and Compliance in Azure Database for MySQL

Azure Database for MySQL provides extensive platform management and
simple integration with new or existing applications. However, a
critical factor for many sensitive industries is being compliant with
regulations. Azure has addressed these customer concerns.

## Data Encryption

Both Azure Database for MySQL offerings, Single Server and Flexible
Server, offer data encryption at-rest. Data, backups, and temporary
files created during query execution are all encrypted.

While Azure can manage encryption keys, Single Server supports bring
your own key (BYOK), providing organizations full key lifecycle control.
This feature is only supported in the General Purpose and Memory
Optimized tiers.

**Configuring Data Encryption At-Rest Guides**

-   [Single Server
    BYOK](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/concepts-data-encryption-mysql)

Moreover, data in-transit is protected using SSL/TLS, which is enforced
by default. However, it is possible to allow insecure connections for
legacy applications or enforce a minimum TLS version for connections.
Consult the guides below, as Flexible Server's TLS enforcement status
can be set through the `require_secure_transport` MySQL server
parameter.

**Configuring Data Encryption In-Motion Guides**

-   [Single
    Server](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/concepts-ssl-connection-security)
-   [Flexible
    Server](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/flexible-server/how-to-connect-tls-ssl)

## Security Best Practices Overview

Organizations must take proactive security measures to protect their
workloads. Azure simplifies following best practices.

### Implement Network Security

Both MySQL PaaS offerings support public connectivity, which permits
certain hosts to access the instance over the public internet, and
private connectivity, which limits access to an Azure virtual network
deployment. The difference between public and private access is
addressed in the [network security document.](./03_Network_Security.md)

### Access Management

When provisioning PaaS MySQL, Azure requires administrator user
credentials. It is best practice to create non-administrator users for
each database in the MySQL instance. Follow
[this](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/howto-create-users) guide
for more information on how to create new databases and manage access.

### Monitoring and Threat Protection

[Microsoft Defender for open-source relational
databases](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/defender-for-cloud/defender-for-databases-introduction)
tracks unusual database activity, like brute force login attempts. It
notifies administrators of anomalies and helps them patch
vulnerabilities. Currently, it is supported in the General Purpose and
Memory Optimized tiers of Single Server. Enable it by following
[this](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/defender-for-cloud/defender-for-databases-usage)
guide.

Single Server and Flexible Server also support audit logging. Note that
excessive audit logging degrades server performance, so be mindful of
the events and users configured for logging.

**Configuring Audit Logging Guides**

-   [Single
    Server](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/concepts-audit-logs)
-   [Flexible
    Server](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/flexible-server/concepts-audit-logs)

# Network Security

As mentioned previously, network configuration affects security,
application performance (latency), and compliance. This guide explains
the fundamentals of PaaS MySQL networking.

## Public vs.Â Private Access

### Public Access

Public access allows hosts, including Azure services, to access the PaaS
MySQL instance via the public internet. Firewall ACLs limit access to
hosts that fall within the allowed IP address ranges. They are set at
the server-level, meaning that they govern network access to all
databases on the instance. While it is best practice to create rules
that allow specific IP addresses or ranges to access the instance,
developers can enable network access from all Azure public IP addresses.
This is useful for Azure services without fixed public IP addresses,
such as [Azure
Functions](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/azure-functions/functions-overview)
that use public access.

> Restricting access to Azure public IP addresses still provides network
> access to the instance to public IPs owned by other Azure customers.

**Configuring Public Access Guides**

-   Single Server
    -   [Azure
        portal](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/howto-manage-firewall-using-portal)
    -   [Azure
        CLI](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/howto-manage-firewall-using-cli)
    -   [ARM Reference for Firewall
        Rules](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/templates/microsoft.dbformysql/servers/firewallrules?tabs=json)
-   Flexible Server
    -   [Azure
        portal](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/flexible-server/how-to-manage-firewall-portal)
    -   [Azure
        CLI](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/flexible-server/how-to-manage-firewall-cli)
    -   [ARM Reference for Firewall
        Rules](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/templates/microsoft.dbformysql/flexibleservers/firewallrules?tabs=json)

### Private Access

#### Virtual Network Hierarchy

An Azure virtual network is similar to a network deployed on-premises:
it provides network isolation for workloads. Each virtual network has a
private IP allocation block. Choosing an allocation block is an
important consideration, especially if your environment requires
multiple virtual networks to be joined: the allocation blocks of the
virtual networks cannot overlap. It is best practice to choose
allocation blocks from [RFC
1918.](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1918)

> **Note**: When deploying a resource such as a VM into a virtual
> network, the virtual network must be located in the same region and
> Azure subscription as the Azure resource. Review the [Introduction to
> Azure](../02_IntroToMySQL/02_02_Introduction_to_Azure.md) document for
> more information about regions and subscriptions.

Each virtual network is further segmented into subnets. Subnets improve
virtual network organization and security, just as they do on-premises.

Virtual networks are joined through *peering*. The peered virtual
networks can reside in the same or different Azure regions.

Lastly, note that it is possible to access resources in a virtual
network from on-premises. Some organizations opt to use VPN connections
through [Azure VPN
Gateway](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/vpn-gateway/vpn-gateway-about-vpngateways),
which sends encrypted traffic over the Internet. Others opt for [Azure
ExpressRoute](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/expressroute/expressroute-introduction),
which establishes a private connection to Azure through a service
provider.

**More Information on Virtual Networks**

-   [Introduction to Azure Virtual
    Networks](https://docs.microsoft.com/learn/modules/introduction-to-azure-virtual-networks/)
-   Creating virtual networks
    -   [Portal](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/virtual-network/quick-create-portal)
    -   [PowerShell](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/virtual-network/quick-create-powershell)
    -   [CLI](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/virtual-network/quick-create-cli)
    -   [ARM
        Template](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/virtual-network/quick-create-template)

#### Flexible Server

Flexible Server supports deployment into a virtual network for secure
access. Specifically, the target subnet must be *delegated*, meaning
that it can only contain Flexible Server instances. Because Flexible
Server is deployed in the virtual network, it has a private IP address.
Virtual networks can be integrated with a private DNS zone to support
name resolution for the Flexible Server instance.

> **Note**: If the Flexible Server client, such as a VM, is located in a
> peered virtual network, then the private DNS zone created for the
> Flexible Server must also be integrated with the peered virtual
> network.

**Configuring Private Access for Flexible Server**

-   [Azure
    portal](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/flexible-server/how-to-manage-virtual-network-portal)
-   [Azure
    CLI](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/flexible-server/how-to-manage-virtual-network-cli)

#### Single Server

Private Access from Single Server can be accomplished through (1)
*Service Endpoints* or (2) *Private Link*; Single Server does not
natively support virtual networks like Flexible Server. Both of these
methods require the General Purpose or Memory Optimized tier.

Service Endpoints only allow traffic from a given virtual network to
access MySQL Single Server. Service endpoints are intended for Azure
resources without public IPs, like VMs deployed in a virtual network, to
access PaaS services securely. However, traffic leaves the virtual
network, as shown in the image below, and access still occurs through
the service public endpoint. In this image, `HDISubnet` and
`BackEndSubnet` have been configured for access by ACLs in the Single
Server instances, but `FrontEndSubnet` has not.

![This image demonstrates how VNet service endpoints allow access to
Single Server, but data leaves the virtual
network.](./media/vnet-concept.png "Service endpoints and Single Server")

Private Link uses *Private Endpoints* to replace public resource
endpoints with private network interfaces accessible through private IP
addresses. Unlike Service Endpoints, all network traffic is contained
within the virtual network.

In the image below, since public access is disabled, access can only
occur through the private endpoint in the `PGVMNET-EUS` virtual network.
Other Azure virtual networks, including those in other regions, like
`VMNET-WUS`, can be peered to the virtual network with the private
endpoint. On-premises network can also be joined to Azure virtual
networks, as explained previously.

![This image explains how private endpoints work to bring PaaS services
into virtual
networks.](./media/show-private-link-overview.png "Private endpoints")

**Configuring Private Access for Single Server**

-   Service Endpoints
    -   [Portal](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/howto-manage-vnet-using-portal)
    -   [CLI](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/howto-manage-vnet-using-cli)
-   Private Link
    -   [Portal](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/howto-configure-privatelink-portal)
    -   [CLI](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/howto-configure-privatelink-cli)

# PHP Language Support

This document describes tools to interact with Azure Database for MySQL
(Single Server and Flexible Server) through PHP.

## Example Code

Refer to the [Connect and Query sample for
PHP.](./03_Connect_Query_PHP.md)

## Application Connectors

There are two major APIs to interact with MySQL in PHP: *MySQLi*, which
is used in the Connect and Query sample, and *PDO*, which is used in the
Laravel sample food ordering site. *MySQLi* and *PDO* are wrappers over
the *mysqlnd* or *libmysqlclient* C libraries: it is highly recommended
to use *mysqlnd* as the default backend library due to its more advanced
features. *mysqlnd* is the default backend provided with PHP.

*MySQLi* is an improvement over the earlier *MySQL* API, which does not
meet the security needs of modern applications.

*PDO*, or *PHP Data Objects*, allows applications to access databases in
PHP through abstractions, standardizing data access for different
databases. PDO works with a database-specific driver, like *PDO_MYSQL*.

Flexible Server and Single Server are compatible with all PHP client
utilities for MySQL Community Edition.

## Resources

1.  [Backend libraries for mysqli and
    PDO_MySQL](https://www.php.net/manual/en/mysqlinfo.library.choosing.php)
2.  [Introduction to PDO](https://www.php.net/manual/en/intro.pdo.php)
3.  [PDO_MYSQL
    Reference](https://www.php.net/manual/en/ref.pdo-mysql.php) \#
    Python Language Support

This document describes tools to interact with Azure Database for MySQL
(Single Server and Flexible Server) through Python.

## Example Code

Refer to the [Connect and Query sample for
Python.](./03_Connect_Query_Python.md)

## Application Connectors

*MySQL Connector/Python* offers a Python Database API
specification-compatible driver for MySQL database access (PEP 249). It
does not depend on a MySQL client library. The Python Connect and Query
sample utilizes *MySQL Connector/Python*.

An alternative connector is *PyMySQL*. It is also PEP 249-compliant.

Django is a popular web application framework for Python. The Django ORM
officially supports MySQL through (1) the *mysqlclient* Python wrapper
for the native MySQL driver or (2) the *MySQL Connector/Python* API.
*mysqlclient* is recommended for use with the Django ORM.

Flexible Server is compatible with all Python client utilities for MySQL
Community Edition. However, Microsoft has only validated *MySQL
Connector/Python* and *PyMySQL* for use with Single Server due to its
network connectivity setup. Refer to
[this](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/concepts-compatibility)
document for more information about drivers compatible with Single
Server.

## Resources

1.  [Introduction to MySQL
    Connector/Python](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/connector-python/en/connector-python-introduction.html)
2.  [PyMySQL
    Samples](https://pymysql.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user/examples.html)
3.  [MySQLdb (mysqlclient) User's
    Guide](https://mysqlclient.readthedocs.io/user_guide.html#mysqldb)
4.  [Django ORM Support for
    MySQL](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/3.2/ref/databases/#mysql-notes)

# Query Azure Database for MySQL using MySQL Workbench

This guide explains how to perform queries against Azure Database for
MySQL Flexible Server using MySQL Workbench, a UI-based management tool.

## Setup

Follow one of the methods in the [Provision MySQL Flexible
Server](03_05_Provision_MySQL_Flexible_Server.md) document to create a
Flexible Server instance with a database.

Download MySQL Workbench from the [MySQL
Downloads.](https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/workbench/) This document
was written using version 8.0.26: we recommend this version because
Single Server is not compatible with 8.0.27, so 8.0.26 has the greatest
flexibility.

## Instructions

This guide is based on a [Microsoft
document.](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/mysql/flexible-server/connect-workbench)
Follow the guide to create a new database in the Flexible Server
instance, create a new table (`inventory`), query the table, update data
in the table, and delete records from the table.

Note that MySQL Workbench can automatically initiate an SSL-secured
connection to Azure Database for MySQL. However, it is recommended to
use the [SSL public
certificate](https://dl.cacerts.digicert.com/DigiCertGlobalRootCA.crt.pem)
in your connections. To bind the SSL public certificate to MySQL
Workbench, choose the downloaded certificate file as the **SSL CA File**
on the **SSL** tab.

![Add the SSL CA file on the SSL tab of the Setup New Connection dialog
box.](./media/new-ssl-connection-with-ca-file.png "Add SSL CA file")

# Monitoring and Alerts

Once the migration has been successfully completed, the next phase it to
manage the new cloud-based data workload resources. Management
operations include both control plane and data plane activities. Control
plane activities are those related to the Azure resources versus data
plane which is **inside** the Azure resource (in this case MySQL).

Azure Database for MySQL provides for the ability to monitor both of
these types of operatonal activities using Azure-based tools such as
[Azure
Monitor](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-monitor/overview),
[Log
Analytics](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-monitor/platform/design-logs-deployment)
and [Azure
Sentinel](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/sentinel/overview). In
addition to the Azure-based tools, security information and event
management (SIEM) systems can be configured to consume these logs as
well.

Whichever tool is used to monitor the new cloud-based workloads, alerts
will need to be created to warn Azure and database administrators of any
suspicious activity. If a particular alert event has a well-defined
remediation path, alerts can fire automated [Azure run
books](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/automation/automation-quickstart-create-runbook)
to address the event.

The first step to creating a fully monitored environment is to enable
MySQL log data to flow into Azure Monitor. Reference [Configure and
access audit logs for Azure Database for MySQL in the Azure
portal](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/howto-configure-audit-logs-portal)
for more information.

Once log data is flowing, use the [Kusto Query Language
(KQL)](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/data-explorer/kusto/query/)
query language to query the various log information. Administrators
unfamiliar with KQL can find a SQL to KQL cheat sheet
[here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/data-explorer/kusto/query/sqlcheatsheet)
or the [Get started with log queries in Azure
Monitor](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-monitor/log-query/get-started-queries)
page.

For example, to get the memory usage of the Azure Database for MySQL:

``` kql
AzureMetrics
| where TimeGenerated > ago(15m)
| limit 10
| where ResourceProvider == "MICROSOFT.DBFORMYSQL"
| where MetricName == "memory_percent"
| project TimeGenerated, Total, Maximum, Minimum, TimeGrain, UnitName
| top 1 by TimeGenerated
```

To get the CPU usage:

``` kql
AzureMetrics
| where TimeGenerated > ago(15m)
| limit 10
| where ResourceProvider == "MICROSOFT.DBFORMYSQL"
| where MetricName == "cpu_percent"
| project TimeGenerated, Total, Maximum, Minimum, TimeGrain, UnitName
| top 1 by TimeGenerated
```

Once you have created the KQL query, you will then create [log
alerts](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-monitor/platform/alerts-unified-log)
based of these queries.

## Server Parameters

As part of the migration, it is likely the on-premises [server
parameters](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/concepts-server-parameters)
were modified to support a fast egress. Also, modifications were made to
the Azure Database for MySQL parameters to support a fast ingress. The
Azure server parameters should be set back to their original on-premises
workload optimized values after the migration.

However, be sure to review and make server parameters changes that are
appropriate for the workload and the environment. Some values that were
great for an on-premises environment, may not be optimal for a
cloud-based environment. Additionally, when planning to migrate the
current on-premises parameters to Azure, verify that they can in fact be
set.

Some parameters are not allowed to be modified in Azure Database for
MySQL.

## PowerShell Module

The Azure Portal and Windows PowerShell can be used for managing the
Azure Database for MySQL. To get started with PowerShell, install the
Azure PowerShell cmdlets for MySQL with the following PowerShell
command:

``` powershell
Install-Module -Name Az.MySql
```

After the modules are installed, reference tutorials like the following
to learn ways you can take advantage of scripting your management
activities:

-   [Tutorial: Design an Azure Database for MySQL using
    PowerShell](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/tutorial-design-database-using-powershell)
-   [How to back up and restore an Azure Database for MySQL server using
    PowerShell](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/howto-restore-server-powershell)
-   [Configure server parameters in Azure Database for MySQL using
    PowerShell](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/howto-configure-server-parameters-using-powershell)
-   [Auto grow storage in Azure Database for MySQL server using
    PowerShell](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/howto-auto-grow-storage-powershell)
-   [How to create and manage read replicas in Azure Database for MySQL
    using
    PowerShell](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/howto-read-replicas-powershell)
-   [Restart Azure Database for MySQL server using
    PowerShell](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/howto-restart-server-powershell)

## Azure Database for MySQL Upgrade Process

Since Azure Database for MySQL is a PaaS offering, administrators are
not responsible for the management of the updates on the operating
system or the MySQL software. However, it is important to be aware the
upgrade process can be random and when being deployed, will stop the
MySQL server workloads. Plan for these downtimes by rerouting the
workloads to a read replica in the event the particular instance goes
into maintenance mode.

> **Note:** This style of failover architecture may require changes to
> the applications data layer to support this type of failover scenario.
> If the read replica is maintained as a read replica and is not
> promoted, the application will only be able to read data and it may
> fail when any operation attempts to write information to the database.

The [Planned maintenance
notification](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/concepts-monitoring#planned-maintenance-notification)
feature will inform resource owners up to 72 hours in advance of
installation of an update or critical security patch. Database
administrators may need to notify application users of planned and
unplanned maintenance.

> **Note:** Azure Database for MySQL maintenance notifications are
> incredibly important. The database maintenance can take your database
> and connected applications down for a period of time. \# Security

Moving to a cloud-based service doesn't mean the entire internet will
have access to it at all times. Azure provides best in class security
that ensures data workloads are continually protected from bad actors
and rouge programs.

## Authentication

Azure Database for MySQL supports the basic authentication mechanisms
for MySQL user connectivity, but also supports [integration with Azure
Active
Directory](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/concepts-azure-ad-authentication).
This security integration works by issuing tokens that act like
passwords during the MySQL login process. [Configuring Active Directory
integration](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/howto-configure-sign-in-azure-ad-authentication)
is incredibly simple to do and supports not only users, but AAD groups
as well.

This tight integration allows administrators and applications to take
advantage of the enhanced security features of [Azure Identity
Protection](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/identity-protection/overview-identity-protection)
to further surface any identity issues.

> **Note:** This security feature is supported by MySQL 5.7 and later.
> Most [application
> drivers](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/howto-configure-sign-in-azure-ad-authentication)
> are supported as long as the `clear-text` option is provided.

## Threat Protection

In the event that user or application credentials are compromised, logs
are not likely to reflect any failed login attempts. Compromised
credentials can allow bad actors to access and download the data. [Azure
Threat
Protection](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/concepts-data-access-and-security-threat-protection)
can watch for anomalies in logins (such as unusual locations, rare users
or brute force attacks) and other suspicious activities. Administrators
can be notified in the event something does not `look` right.

## Audit Logging

MySQL has a robust built-in audit log feature. By default, this [audit
log feature is
disabled](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/concepts-audit-logs)
in Azure Database for MySQL. Server level logging can be enabled by
changing the `audit_log_enabled` server parameter. Once enabled, logs
can be accessed through [Azure
Monitor](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-monitor/overview)
and [Log
Analytics](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-monitor/platform/design-logs-deployment)
by turning on [diagnostic
logging](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/howto-configure-audit-logs-portal#set-up-diagnostic-logs).

To query for user connection related events, run the following KQL
query:

``` kql
AzureDiagnostics
| where ResourceProvider =="MICROSOFT.DBFORMYSQL"
| where Category == 'MySqlAuditLogs' and event_class_s == "connection_log"
| project TimeGenerated, LogicalServerName_s, event_class_s, event_subclass_s, event_time_t, user_s , ip_s , sql_text_s
| order by TimeGenerated asc
```

## Encryption

Data in the MySQL instance is encrypted at rest by default. Any
automated backups are also encrypted to prevent potential leakage of
data to unauthorized parties. This encryption is typically performed
with a key that is created when the instance is created. In addition to
this default encryption key, administrators have the option to [bring
your own key
(BYOK)](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/concepts-data-encryption-mysql).

When using a customer-managed key strategy, it is vital to understand
responsibilities around key lifecycle management. Customer keys are
stored in an [Azure Key
Vault](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/key-vault/general/basic-concepts)
and then accessed via policies. It is vital to follow all
recommendations for key management, the loss of the encryption key
equates to the loss of data access.

In addition to a customer-managed keys, use service-level keys to [add
double
encryption](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/concepts-infrastructure-double-encryption).
Implementing this feature will provide highly encrypted data at rest,
but it does come with encryption performance penalties. Testing should
be performed.

Data can be encrypted during transit using SSL/TLS. As previously
discussed, it may be necessary to [modify your
applications](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/howto-configure-ssl)
to support this change and also configure the appropriate TLS validation
settings.

## Firewall

Once users are set up and the data is encrypted at rest, the migration
team should review the network data flows. Azure Database for MySQL
provides several mechanisms to secure the networking layers by limiting
access to only authorized users, applications and devices.

The first line of defense for protecting the MySQL instance is to
implement [firewall
rules](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/concepts-firewall-rules).
IP addresses can be limited to only valid locations when accessing the
instance via internal or external IPs. If the MySQL instance is destined
to only serve internal applications, then [restrict public
access](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/howto-deny-public-network-access).

When moving an application to Azure along with the MySQL workload, it is
likely there will be multiple virtual networks setup in a hub and spoke
pattern that will require [Virtual Network
Peering](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-network/virtual-network-peering-overview)
to be configured.

## Private Link

To limit access to the Azure Database for MySQL to internal Azure
resources, enable [Private
Link](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/concepts-data-access-security-private-link).
Private Link will ensure that the MySQL instance will be assigned a
private IP rather than a public IP address.

> **Note:** There are many other [basic Azure Networking
> considerations](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/concepts-data-access-and-security-vnet)
> that must be taken into account that are not the focus of this guide.

Review a set of potential [security
baseline](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/security-baseline)
tasks that can be implemented across all Azure resources. Not all of the
items described on the reference link will apply to the specific data
workloads or Azure resources.

## Security Checklist

-   Use Azure AD authentication where possible.
-   Enable Advanced Thread Protection.
-   Enable all auditing features.
-   Consider a Bring-Your-Own-Key (BYOK) strategy.
-   Implement firewall rules.
-   Utilize private endpoints for workloads that do not travel over the
    Internet.

# Optimization

## Monitoring Hardware and Query Performance

In addition to the audit and activity logs, server performance can also
be monitored with [Azure
Metrics](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-monitor/platform/data-platform-metrics).
Azure metrics are provided in a one-minute frequency and alerts can be
configured from them. For more information, reference [Monitoring in
Azure Database for
MySQL](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/concepts-monitoring)
for specifics on what kind of metrics that can be monitored.

As previously mentioned, monitoring metrics such as the `cpu_percent` or
`memory_percent` can be important when deciding to upgrade the database
tier. Consistently high values could indicate a tier upgrade is
necessary.

Additionally, if cpu and memory do not seem to be the issue,
administrators can explore database-based options such as indexing and
query modifications for poor performing queries.

To find poor performing queries, run the following:

``` kql
AzureDiagnostics
| where ResourceProvider == "MICROSOFT.DBFORMYSQL"
| where Category == 'MySqlSlowLogs'
| project TimeGenerated, LogicalServerName_s, event_class_s, start_time_t , query_time_d, sql_text_s
| top 5 by query_time_d desc
```

## Query Performance Insight

In addition to the basic server monitoring aspects, Azure provides tools
to monitor application query performance. Correcting or improving
queries can lead to significant increases in the query throughput. Use
the [Query Performance Insight
tool](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/concepts-query-performance-insight)
to analyze the longest running queries and determine if it is possible
to cache those items if they are deterministic within a set period, or
modify the queries to increase their performance.

The `slow_query_log` can be set to show slow queries in the MySQL log
files (default is OFF). The `long_query_time` server parameter can alert
users for long query times (default is 10 sec).

## Upgrading the Tier

The Azure Portal can be used to scale between from `General Purpose` and
`Memory Optimized`. If a `Basic` tier is chosen, there will be no option
to upgrade the tier to `General Purpose` or `Memory Optimized` later.
However, it is possible to utilize other techniques to perform a
migration/upgrade to a new Azure Database for MySQL instance.

For an example of a script that will migrate from Basic to another
server tier, reference [Upgrade from Basic to General Purpose or Memory
Optimized tiers in Azure Database for
MySQL](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/t5/azure-database-for-mysql/upgrade-from-basic-to-general-purpose-or-memory-optimized-tiers/ba-p/830404).

## Scale the Server

Within the tier, it is possible to scale cores and memory to the minimum
and maximum limits allowed in that tier. If monitoring shows a continual
maxing out of CPU or memory, follow the steps to [scale-up to meet your
demand](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/t5/azure-database-for-mysql/upgrade-from-basic-to-general-purpose-or-memory-optimized-tiers/ba-p/830404).

## Moving Regions

Moving a database to a different Azure region depends on the approach
and architecture. Depending on the approach, it could cause system
downtime.

The recommended process is the same as utilizing read replicas for
maintenance failover. However, compared to the planned maintenance
method mentioned above, the speed to failover is much faster when a
failover layer has been implemented in the application. The application
should only be down for a few moments during the read replica failover
process. More details are covered in the [Business Continuity and
Disaster Recovery](03_BCDR.md) section.

## Optimization Checklist

-   Monitor for slow queries.
-   Periodically review the Performance Insight dashboard.
-   Utilize monitoring to drive tier upgrades and scale decisions.
-   Consider moving regions if the users or application needs change.

TODO -
https://wemakewaves.medium.com/migrating-our-php-applications-to-docker-without-sacrificing-performance-1a69d81dcafb

# Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery (BCDR)

## Backup and Restore

As with any mission critical system, having a backup and restore as well
as a disaster recovery (BCDR) strategy is an important part of your
overall system design. If an unforseen event occurs, you should have the
ability to restore your data to a point in time (Recovery Point
Objective) in a reasonable amount of time (Recovery Time Objective).

### Backup

Azure Database for MySQL supports automatic backups for 7 days by
default. It may be appropriate to modify this to the current maximum of
35 days. It is important to be aware that if the value is changed to 35
days, there will be charges for any extra backup storage over 1x of the
storage allocated.

There are several current limitations to the database backup feature as
described in the [Backup and restore in Azure Database for
MySQL](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/concepts-backup)
docs article. It is important to understand them when deciding what
additional strategies that should be implemented.

Some items to be aware of include:

-   No direct access to the backups
-   Tiers that allow up to 4TB have a full backup once per week,
    differential twice a day, and logs every five minutes
-   Tiers that allow up to 16TB have backups that are snapshot based

> **Note:** [Some
> regions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/concepts-pricing-tiers#storage)
> do not yet support storage up to 16TB.

### Restore

Redundancy (local or geo) must be configured during server creation.
However, a geo-restore can be performed and allows the modification of
these options during the restore process. Performing a restore operation
will temporarily stop connectivity and any applications will be down
during the restore process.

During a database restore, any supporting items outside of the database
will also need to be restored. Review the migration process. See
[Perform post-restore
tasks](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/concepts-backup#perform-post-restore-tasks)
for more information.

## Read Replicas

[Read
replicas](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/mysql/concepts-read-replicas)
can be used to increase the MySQL read throughput, improve performance
for regional users and to implement disaster recovery. When creating one
or more read replicas, be aware that additional charges will apply for
the same compute and storage as the primary server.

## Deleted Servers

If an administrator or bad actor deletes the server in the Azure Portal
or via automated methods, all backups and read replicas will also be
deleted. It is important that [resource
locks](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-resource-manager/management/lock-resources)
are created on the Azure Database for MySQL resource group to add an
extra layer of deletion prevention to the instances.

## Regional Failure

Although rare, if a regional failure occurs geo-redundant backups or a
read replica can be used to get the data workloads running again. It is
best to have both geo-replication and a read replica available for the
best protection against unexpected regional failures.

> **Note** Changing the database server region also means the endpoint
> will change and application configurations will need to be updated
> accordingly.

### Load Balancers

If the application is made up of many different instances around the
world, it may not be feasible to update all of the clients. Utilize an
[Azure Load
Balancer](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/load-balancer/load-balancer-overview)
or [Application
Gateway](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/application-gateway/overview)
to implement a seamless failover functionality. Although helpful and
time-saving, these tools are not required for regional failover
capability.

## WWI Case Study

WWI wanted to test the failover capabilities of read replicas so they
performed the steps outlined below.

### Creating a read replica

-   Open the Azure Portal.
-   Browse to the Azure Database for MySQL instance.
-   Under **Settings**, select **Replication**.
-   Select **Add Replica**.
-   Type a server name.
-   Select the region.
-   Select **OK**, wait for the instance to deploy. Depending on the
    size of the main instance, it could take some time to replicate.

> **Note:** Each replica will incur additional charges equal to the main
> instance.

### Failover to read replica

Once a read replica has been created and has completed the replication
process, it can be used for failed over. Replication will stop during a
failover and make the read replica its own main instance.

Failover Steps:

-   Open the Azure Portal.
-   Browse to the Azure Database for MySQL instance.
-   Under **Settings**, select **Replication**.
-   Select one of the read replicas.
-   Select **Stop Replication**. This will break the read replica.
-   Modify all applications connection strings to point to the new main
    instance.

## BCDR Checklist

-   Modify backup frequency to meet requirements.
-   Setup read replicas for read intensive workloads and regional
    failover.
-   Create resource locks on resource groups.
-   Implement a load balancing strategy for applications for quick
    failover.

TODO -
https://semaphoreci.com/blog/7-continuous-integration-tools-for-php-laravel
